# Walkthrough: Compile a C++/CLI Program that Targets the CLR in Visual Studio

(*9/17/2021*)

1.
    1. By using C++/CLI you can create C++ programs that use .NET classes as well as native C++ types.
    2. C++/CLI is intended for use in console applications and in DLLs that wrap native C++ code and make it accessible from .NET programs.
    3. To create a Windows user interface based on .NET, use C# or Visual Basic.

2.
    1. For this procedure, you can type your own C++ program or use one of the example programs.
    2. The sample program that we use in this procedure creates a text file named `textfile.txt`, and saves it to the project directory.

## 1. Prerequisites

1. An understanding of the fundamentals of the C++ language.
2. In Visual Studio 2017 and later, C++/CLI support is an optional component. To install it, open the **Visual Studio Installer** from the Windows Start menu. Make sure that the **Desktop development with C++** tile is checked, and in the **Optional** components section, also check **C++/CLI Support**.

## 2. Create a new project

1.
    1. The following steps vary depending on which version of Visual Studio you are using.
    2. To see the documentation for your preferred version of Visual Studio, use the **Version** selector control.
    3. It's found at the top of the table of contents on this page.

### 2.1 To create a C++/CLI project in Visual Studio 2019

1. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click on the top to open the **Create a New Project** dialog box.
2. At the top of the dialog, type **CLR** in the search box and then choose **CLR Empty Project** from the results list.
3. Choose the **Create** button to create the project.

## 3. Add a source file

1. If **Solution Explorer** isn't visible, click **Solution Explorer** on the **View** menu.

2. Add a new source file to the project:
    1. Right-click the **Source Files** folder in **Solution Explorer**, point to **Add**, and click **New Item**.
    2. Click **C++ File (.cpp)** and type a file name and then click **Add**.
   The **.cpp** file appears in the **Source Files** folder in **Solution Explorer** and a tabbed window appears where you type the code you want in that file.

3.
    1. Click in the newly created tab in Visual Studio and type a valid Visual C++ program, or copy and paste one of the sample programs.
    2. For example, you can use the How to: Write a Text File (C++/CLI) sample program (in the **File Handling and I/O** code of the Programming Guide).
    3. If you use the sample program, notice that you use the `gcnew` keyword instead of `new` when creating a .NET object, and that `gcnew` returns a handle (`^`) rather than a pointer (`*`):

```cpp
StreamWriter^ sw = gcnew StreamWriter(fileName);
```
    4. For more information on C++/CLI syntax, see Component Extensions for Runtime Platforms.

4.
    1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
    2. The **Output** window displays information about the compilation progress, such as the location of the build log and a message that indicates the build status.
    3. If you make changes and run the program without doing a build, a dialog box might indicate that the project is out of date. Select the checkbox on this dialog before you click **OK** if you want Visual Studio to always use the current versions of files instead of prompting you each time it builds the application.

5. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start without Debugging**.

6.
    1. If you used the sample program, when you run the program a command window is displayed that indicates the text file has been created.
    2. The **textfile.txt** text file is now located in your project directory. You can open this file by using Notepad.

> **Note**
> Choosing the empty CLR project template automatically set the `/clr` compiler option. To verify this, right-click the project in **Solution Explorer** and clicking **Properties**, and then check the **Common Language Runtime support** option in the **General** node of **Configuration Properties**.