# Chapter 1. Overview of Vulkan

#### What You'll Learn in This Chapter

    1. What Vulkan is and the fundamentals behind it
    2. How to create a minimal Vulkan application
    3. The terminology and concepts used in the remainder of this book

1.
    1. In this chapter, we introduce Vulkan and explain what it is.
    2. We introduce some of the fundamental concepts behind the API, including initialization, object lifetimes, the Vulkan instance, and logical and physical devices.
    3. By the end of the chapter, we produce a simple Vulkan application that can initialize the Vulkan system, discover available Vulkan devices and show their properties and capabilities, and finally shut down cleanly.

## 1. Introduction

1.
    1. Vulkan is a programming interface for graphics and compute devices.
    2. A Vulkan device typically consists of a processor and a number of fixed-function hardware blocks to accelerate operations used in graphics and compute.
    3. The processor in the device is usually a very wide multithreaded processor and so the computational mdoel in Vulkan is heavily based on parallel computing.
    4. The Vulkan device also has access to memory that may or may not be shared with the main processor upon which your application is running.
    5. Vulkan also exposes this memory to you.

2.
    1. Vulkan is an explicit API.
    2. That is, almost everything is your responsibility.
    3. A driver is a piece of software that takes the commands and data forming the API and translates them into something that hardware can understand.
    4. In older APIs such as OpenGL, drivers would track the state of a lot of objects, manage memory and synchronization for you, and check for errors in your application as it ran.
    5. This is great for developers but burns valuable CPU time once your application is debugged and running correctly.
    6. Vulkan addresses this by placing almost all state tracking, synchronization, and memory management into the hands of the application developer and by delegating correctness checks to *layers* that must be enabled.
    7. They do not participate in the execution of your application under normal circumstances.

3.
    1. For these reasons, Vulkan is both very verbose and somewhat fragile.
    2. You need to do an awful lot of work to get Vulkan running well, and incorrect usage of the API can lead to graphical corruption or even program crashes where in older APIs you would have received a helpful error message.
    3. In exchange for this, Vulkan provides more control over the device, a clean threading model, and much higher performance than the APIs that it supersedes.

4.
    1. Further, Vulkan has been designed to be more than a *graphics* API.
    2. It can be used for heterogeneous devices such as graphics processing units (GPUs), digital signal processors (DSPs), and fixed-function hardware.
    3. Functionality is divided into coarse-grained, broadly overlapping categories.
    4. The current edition of Vulkan defines the transfer category, which is used for copying data around; the compute category, which is used for running shaders over computer workloads; and the graphics category, which includes rasterization, primitive assembly, blending, depth and stencil tests, and other functionality that will be familiar to graphics programmers.

5.
    1. To the extent that support for each category is optional, it's possible to have a Vulkan device that doesn't support graphics at all.
    2. As a consequence, even the APIs to put pictures onto a display device (which is called *presentation*) are not only optional, but are provided as *extensions* to Vulkan rather than being part of the core API.

## 2. Instances, Devices, and Queues

1.
    1. Vulkan includes a hierarchy of functionality, starting at the top level with the *instance*, which aggregates all Vulkan-capable *devices* together.
    2. Each device then exposes one or more *queues*.
    3. It is the queues that perform the work that your application requests.

2.
    1. The Vulkan instance is a software construct that logically separates the state of your application from other applications or libraries running within the context of your application.
    2. The physical devices in the system are presented as members of the instance, each of which has certain capabilties, including a selection of available queues.

3.
    1. A physical device usually represents a single piece of hardware or a collection of hardware that is interconnected.
    2. There is a fixed, finite number of physical devices in any system unless that system support reconfiguration such as hot-plug.
    3. A logical device, which is created by the instance, is the software construct around a physical device and represents a reservation of resources associated with a particular physical device.
    4. This includes a possible subset of the available queues on the physical device.
    5. It is possible to create multiple logical devices representing a single physical device, and it is the logical device that your application will spend most of its time interacting with.

4.
    1. Figure 1.1 illustrates this hierarchy.
    2. In the figure, the application has created two Vulkan instances.
    3. There are three physical devices in the system that are available to both instances.
    4. After enumeration, the application creates one logical device on the first physical device, two logical devices for the second device, and another for the third.
    5. Each logical device enables a different subset of its corresponding physical device's queues.
    6. In practice, most Vulkan applications won't be nearly this complex and will simply create a single logical device for one of the physical devices in the system, using a single instance.
    7. Figure 1.1 only serves to demonstrate the flexibility of the Vulkan system.

*Figure 1.1*: Vulkan Hierarchy of Instance, Device, and Queue.

5.
    1. The following subsections discuss how to create the Vulkan instance, query the physical devices in the system, attach a logical device corresponding to one of them, and finally retrieve handles to the queues exposed by the device.

### 2.1 The Vulkan Instance

1.
    1. Vulkan can be seen as a subsystem of your application.
    2. Once you link your application to the Vulkan libraries and initialize it, it tracks some state.
    3. Because Vulkan doesn't introduce any global state into your application, all tracked state must be stored in an object that you provide.
    4. This is the *instance* object and is represented by a `VkInstance` object.
    5. To construct one, we'll call our first Vulkan function, `vkCreateInstance()`, the prototype of which is

```cpp
VkResult vkCreateInstance(
    const VkInstanceCreateInfo* pCreateInfo,
    const VkAllocationCallbacks* pAllocator,
    VkInstance* pInstance
);
```

2.
    1. This declaration is typical of a Vulkan function.
    2. WHere more than a handful of parameters are to be passed to Vulkan functions, often take pointers to structures.
    3. Here, `pCreateInfo` is a pointer to an instance of the `VkInstanceCreateInfo` structure that contains the parameters describing the new Vulkan instance.
    4. The definition of `VkInstanceCreateInfo` is

```cpp
typedef struct VkInstanceCreateInfo {
    VkStructureType sType;
    const void* pNext;
    VkInstanceCreateFlags flags;
    const VkApplicationInfo* pApplicationInfo;
    uint32_t enabledLayerCount;
    const char* const* ppEnabledLayerNames;
    uint32_t enabledExtensionCount;
    const char* const* ppEnabledExtensionNames;
} VkInstanceCreateInfo;
```

1.
    1. The first member in almost every Vulkan structure that is used to pass parameters to the API is the `sType` field, which tells Vulkan what type of structure this is.
    2. Each structure in the core API and in any extension has an assigned structure tag.
    3. By inspecting this tag, Vulkan tools, layers, and drivers can determine the type of the structure for validation purposes and for use in extensions.
    4. Further, the `pNext` field allows a *linked list* of structures to be passed to the function.
    5. This allows the set of parameters to be extended without needing to replace the core structure wholesale in an extension.
    6. Because we are using the core instance creation structure here, we pass `VK_STRUCTURE_TYPE_INSTANCE_CREATE_INFO` in the `sType` field and simply set `pNext` to `nullptr`.

2.
    1. The `flags` field of `VkInstanceCreateInfo` is reserved for future use and should be set to zero.
    2. The next field, `pApplicationInfo`, is an optional pointer to another structure describing your application.
    3. You can set this to `nullptr`, but a well-behaved application should fill this in with something useful.
    4. `pApplicationInfo` points to an instance of the `VkApplicationInfo` structure, the definition of which is

```cpp
typedef struct VkApplicationInfo {
    VkStructureType sType;
    const void* pNext;
    const char* pApplicationName;
    uint32_t applicationVersion;
    const char* pEngineName;
    uint32_t engineVersion;
    uint32_t apiVersion;
} VkApplicationInfo;
```

3.